aliens trick 👽 (#4382)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/6_Advanced/Lagrange.mdx

Now we know exactly what $\lambda$ represents: $\lambda$ is the slope and $c(\lambda)$ is the rightmost $x$ at which the slope of $f(x)$ is still greater or equal to $\lambda$.

We binary search for $\lambda$ and find the first $\lambda$ such that $c(\lambda) \ge K$. Let the optimal value be $\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}$. Then our answer is $v(\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}) + \lambda_{\texttt{opt}} K$. Note that this works even if $c(\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}) \neq K$ since  $c(\lambda_{\texttt{opt}})$ and $K$ will be on the same line with slope $\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}$ in that case.

Because calculating $v(\lambda)$ and $c(\lambda)$ with the dynamic programming solution described above will take $\mathcal{O}(N)$ time, this solution runs in $\mathcal{O}(N\log{\sum A[i]})$ time.

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

#define ll long long

> const ll INF = (ll)300000 * 1000000000;

Reviewer: why not just smth like 1e18

Author: uhh do you think i should change it to 1e18? right now its that because i said the time complexity is \sum{A[i]} and making it 1e18 will make it like slightly slower i guess

Reviewer: if it still ACs then yeah

int main() {
	int n, k;
	cin >> n >> k;

> 	int a[n + 1];

Reviewer: do you ever touch element 0 of this array?

Author: uhh no. i one indexed to make the dp transitions cleaner as i don't have to worry about i-1 being sus

Reviewer: > worry about i-1 being sus

if the array was 0-indexed, should your dp access -1 in the first place?
right now if your dp is doing so, currently this code is silently erroring

Author: > right now if your dp is doing so, currently this code is silently erroring

wait my for loop starts at 1 so im not accessing -1. like basically everything is one indexed in the code. surely its good :trust:

> if the array was 0-indexed, should your dp access -1 in the first place?

if the array is 0 indexed i would be accessing -1 with the current code (since i would have to start at i=0) but ig it can be fixed by initializing the base case using A[0] but that seems kinda strange and less straight forward.

Reviewer: idk i feel like making initializing the base case explicitly would be kinda nice

Author: wait like make everything zero indexed and initialize the first entry with A[0]:
dp[0][0] = {0, 0};
dp[0][1] = {A[0] - lambda, 1};

instead of what I'm currently doing now:
dp[0][0] = {0, 0};
dp[0][1] = {-INF, 0};

Reviewer: yeah i don't see anything wrong with that

	 />
</Resources>

## Lagrangian Relaxation

Lagrangian Relaxation involves transforming a constraint on a variable into a cost $\lambda$ and binary searching for the optimal $\lambda$.

<FocusProblem problem="sample" />

The problem gives us a length $N$ ($1 \le N \le 3 \cdot 10^5$) array of integers in the range $[-10^9,10^9]$. We are given some $K$ ($1 \le K \le N$) and are asked to choose at most $K$ disjoint subarrays such that the sum of elements included in a subarray is maximized.

### Intuition

The main bottleneck of any dynamic programming solution to this problem is having to store the number of subarrays we have created so far.

> Let's try to find a way around this. Instead of storing the number of subarrays we have created so far, we assign a penalty of $\lambda$ for creating a new subarray (i.e. everytime we create a subarray we penalize our sum by $\lambda$).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's try to find a way around this. Instead of storing the number of subarrays we have created so far, we assign a penalty of $\lambda$ for creating a new subarray (i.e. every time we create a subarray we penalize our sum by $\lambda$).
```

This idea almost works but there are still some very important caveats and conditions that we have not considered.

### Geometry

Let $f(x)$ be the maximal sum if we use at most $x$ subarrays. We want to find $f(K)$.

The first condition is that $f(x)$ **must be concave or convex**. Since $f(x)$ is increasing in this problem, the means that we need $f(x)$ to be concave: $f(x) - f(x - 1) \ge f(x + 1) - f(x)$. In other words, this means that the more subarrays we add, the less we increase the sum by. We can intuitively see that this is true.

<Spoiler title="Proof that our function is concave">

We construct a flow graph with source $S$, sink $T$, and $N+1$ additional vertices numbered $1$ to $N+1$. We will have the following edges.

- A directed edge from $S$ to $i$ ($1 \le i \le N+1$) with weight $0$ and capacity $1$.

- A directed edge from $i$ ($1 \le i \le N+1$) to $T$ with weight $0$ and capacity $1$.

- A bidirectional edge from $i$ ($1 \le i \le N$) to $i+1$ with weight $A[i]$ and capacity $1$.

> $f(x)$ will be the maximum cost $x$-flow through the graph. We can repeatidly find the maximum cost augmenting path $x$ times to get our answer. Because the maximum cost as a function of flow is concave, $f(x)$ will be concave. You can read more about simulating cost flows [here](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/118391).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$f(x)$ will be the maximum cost $x$-flow through the graph. We can repeatedly find the maximum cost augmenting path $x$ times to get our answer. Because the maximum cost as a function of flow is concave, $f(x)$ will be concave. You can read more about simulating cost flows [here](https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/118391).
```

Now we know exactly what $\lambda$ represents: $\lambda$ is the slope and $c(\lambda)$ is the rightmost $x$ at which the slope of $f(x)$ is still greater or equal to $\lambda$.

We binary search for $\lambda$ and find the first $\lambda$ such that $c(\lambda) \ge K$. Let the optimal value be $\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}$. Then our answer is $v(\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}) + \lambda_{\texttt{opt}} K$. Note that this works even if $c(\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}) \neq K$ since  $c(\lambda_{\texttt{opt}})$ and $K$ will be on the same line with slope $\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}$ in that case.

Because calculating $v(\lambda)$ and $c(\lambda)$ with the dynamic programming solution described above will take $\mathcal{O}(N)$ time, this solution runs in $\mathcal{O}(N\log{\sum A[i]})$ time.

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

#define ll long long

int main() {
	int n, k;
	cin >> n >> k;

	int a[n];
	for (int &i : a) { cin >> i; }

> 	/*
> 	 * Returns {maximum sum, subarrays used (max if ties)}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	/**
	 * @returns the maximum sum along with the number of subarrays used
```

Now we know exactly what $\lambda$ represents: $\lambda$ is the slope and $c(\lambda)$ is the position with slope equal to $\lambda$ (if there are multiple such positions then $c(\lambda)$ is the leftmost one).

We binary search for $\lambda$ and find the highest $\lambda$ such that $c(\lambda) \le K$. Let the optimal value be $\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}$. Then our answer is $v(\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}) + \lambda_{\texttt{opt}} K$. Note that this works even if $c(\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}) \neq K$ since  $c(\lambda_{\texttt{opt}})$ and $K$ will be on the same line with slope $\lambda_{\texttt{opt}}$ in that case.

Because calculating $v(\lambda)$ and $c(\lambda)$ with the dynamic programming solution described above will take $\mathcal{O}(N)$ time, this solution runs in $\mathcal{O}(N\log{\sum A[i]})$ time.

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

#define ll long long

> const int MAX = 3e5 + 5;

Reviewer: why +5

Author: ok i changed it to MAX=3e5 and declared my arrays with MAX+1 (since everything is 1 indexed)

int n, k, A[MAX];

> pair<ll, ll> dp[MAX][2];

Reviewer: better names

Author: Wait is it fine if I don't since n, k, and A are the variables used in the problem and dp is like dp? Idk since the problem is themed around food and I don't want my variables to be about food lol

Reviewer: alright fine but

> I don't want my variables to be about food lol

lmao what

pair<ll, ll> better(pair<ll, ll> a, pair<ll, ll> b) {

> 	if (a.first == b.first) return (a.second < b.second ? a : b);

Reviewer: braces

	return (a.first > b.first ? a : b);
}

> bool solve(ll lmb) {

Reviewer: move this into main

Author: Huh wdym? Like do you mean create a lambda in main or move it directly inside the binary search? It feels kind of weird and I edited my code so can you check if I still need to do this?

Reviewer: move it directly inside the binsearch

while you're at it make `n`, `k`, `A`, and `dp` all local variables

Author: wait hollup u need to run the same dp again after the binary search tho to get ur answer so shud i do it as a lambda lol

Reviewer: come again? i don't see why you can't just extract the code from the function into the for loop
nothing in it seems to depend on anything

Author: The function solveLambda is called in two separate places -- once inside the binary search and once in:
cout << solveLambda(lo).first + lo * k << endl;

So I will have to paste the same dp stuff into 2 separate places which is 😳

Reviewer: you could also store the result in a variable `last_run` or whatever

Author: Hmm i guess u can do that but u would have to make sure that you only store the result from the last true run (assuming its smth like FFFFTTTT) and you have to make sure 'hi' is greater than the max opt lambda. I think it makes the code feel strange or smth. 

Can I just leave it as a lambda in main? tbh i think it looks the best and is most natural when it's as a function outside of main.

Reviewer: alright then
but at least add some comments about what this function actually does, what it returns, etc.

	dp[0][0] = {0, 0};
	dp[0][1] = {-1e18, 0};

	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
		dp[i][0] = better(dp[i - 1][0], dp[i - 1][1]);

		dp[i][1] =
		    better({dp[i - 1][0].first + A[i] - lmb, dp[i - 1][0].second + 1},
		           {dp[i - 1][1].first + A[i], dp[i - 1][1].second});
	}
	return better(dp[n][0], dp[n][1]).second <= k;
}

int main() {
	ios_base::sync_with_stdio;

> 	cin.tie(0);

Reviewer: remove if runs w/o

	cin >> n >> k;

	for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) cin >> A[i];

> 	ll L = 0, H = 1e15;

Reviewer: use `INT64_MAX` instead

Author: ok i just used INF instead lol

Reviewer: i mean why can't int64_max work

Author: uhh its fine but ig having INF is more convenient since i also initialize dp with INF. and ig another issue is that (lo+hi)/2 will overflow so u are forced to do the lo + (hi - lo) / 2 thingy

Reviewer 3: why use int64_max though?

Reviewer: > uhh its fine but ig having INF is more convenient since i also initialize dp with INF. and ig another issue is that (lo+hi)/2 will overflow so u are forced to do the lo + (hi - lo) / 2 thingy

i'm pretty sure it wouldn't? i've done int64_max before and it worked just fine

Author: oh wait yeah nvm it works in this case. ig ill still stick with inf since it is used to declare the dp and the dp cannot be initialized with int64_min

Reviewer: > the dp cannot be initialized with int64_min

why's that

Author: the transition (specifically dp[i - 1][0].first + a[i] - lmb) will underflow

Reviewer: i feel like you should check for the smallest value in that case

Author: wait like set it to int64min and check if (dp[i - 1][0].first + a[i] - lmb) will underflow?

Reviewer: on second thought just keep it as inf

	while (L < H) {
		ll M = (L + H) / 2;

> 		solve(M) ? H = M : L = M + 1;

Reviewer: also names should be in lowercase at least

Author: ok i changed it to lo and hi

	}
	solve(L);

> 	cout << better(dp[n][0], dp[n][1]).first + L * k << "\n";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	cout << better(dp[n][0], dp[n][1]).first + L * k << endl;
```

#define ll long long

int main() {
	int n, k;
	cin >> n >> k;

	int a[n];
	for (int &i : a) cin >> i;

	/*
	 * Returns {maximum sum, subarrays used (max if ties)}
	 * if creating a subarray penalizes the sum by "lmb" and
	 * there is no limit to the number of subarrays you can create
	 */
	auto solveLambda = [&](ll lmb) {
		pair<ll, ll> dp[n][2];

		dp[0][0] = {0, 0};
		dp[0][1] = {a[0] - lmb, 1};

		for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
			dp[i][0] = max(dp[i - 1][0], dp[i - 1][1]);

			dp[i][1] =
			    max(make_pair(dp[i - 1][0].first + a[i] - lmb,
			                  dp[i - 1][0].second + 1),
			        make_pair(dp[i - 1][1].first + a[i], dp[i - 1][1].second));
		}
		return max(dp[n - 1][0], dp[n - 1][1]);
	};

> 	ll lo = 0, hi = 1e18;

Reviewer: :skull: why'd you overwrite my changes

Author: oh wait oops i copy pasted from the wrong thing 💀

	ll lo = 0;
	ll hi = 1e18;
	while (lo < hi) {
		ll mid = (lo + hi + 1) / 2;

> 		solve_lambda(mid).second >= k ? lo = mid : hi = mid - 1;

Reviewer 2: so was it wrong before?

Author: yeah i think it was wrong before (somehow ACs due to weak tests or smth). i stress tested and found some cases where the code before WAs. hopefully it's correct now lol
